.TH TXM 1 "July 2026" "txm 1.2.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
txm \- A terminal session manager with multi-backend support
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B txm
[\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fB\-v\fR|\fB\-\-verbose\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtxm\fR is a command-line utility for managing terminal multiplexer sessions with support for multiple backends: native, tmux, zellij, and GNU Screen. It automatically detects available backends and provides a unified interface for session management.
.SH BACKEND SUPPORT
\fBtxm\fR supports four terminal multiplexer backends:
.TP
\fBnative\fR
Built-in lightweight backend using libghostty for high-performance accurate VT terminal emulation with session persistence and scrollback restoration.
.TP
\fBtmux\fR
Full feature set with advanced pane operations, window management, and session control.
.TP
\fBzellij\fR
Modern workspace paradigm with tab-based workflow and plugin system.
.TP
\fBGNU Screen\fR
Reliable fallback with basic session and window operations.

Backend selection follows this priority order:
1. \fBTXM_DEFAULT_BACKEND\fR environment variable
2. User configuration in \fI~/.txm/config\fR
3. Auto-detection (native → tmux → zellij → screen)
.SH CONFIGURATION
\fBtxm\fR supports configuration via:
.TP
\fB~/.txm/config\fR
JSON configuration file for persistent settings.
.TP
\fBTXM_DEFAULT_BACKEND\fR
Environment variable to override backend selection (values: tmux, zellij, screen).
.TP
Configuration commands:
.B txm config default-backend [BACKEND]
Set or show the default backend.
.B txm config backend-order [BACKEND1,BACKEND2,...]
Set the backend preference order.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
\fBattach\fR [\fISESSION_NAME\fR] [\fB\-r\fR|\fB\-\-read-only\fR]
Attach to a session. Automatically attaches to the only available session or creates one if none exist. Use \fB\-r\fR for read-only mode.
.TP
\fBcompletion\fR [\fIbash|zsh|fish|powershell\fR] [\fB\-\-install\fR]
Generate the autocompletion script for the specified shell. Use \fB\-\-install\fR to automatically configure your RC files.
.TP
\fBconfig\fR [\fIset|get|show\fR] [\fIkey\fR] [\fIvalue\fR]
Manage configuration settings.
.br
\fBconfig set backend\fR [\fInative|tmux|zellij|screen\fR] - Set default backend
.br
\fBconfig get backend\fR - Show current default backend
.br
\fBconfig show\fR - Show all configuration
.TP
\fBcreate\fR [\fISESSION_NAME\fR] [\fB\-\-log\fR]
Create a new session. Use \fB\-\-log\fR to mirror PTY output to a persistent file.
.TP
\fBdelete\fR [\fISESSION_NAME\fR]
Delete a session.
.TP
\fBdetach\fR
Detach from the current session. For native backend, you can also use \fBCtrl+\\\fR.
.TP
\fBexec\fR [\fISESSION_NAME\fR] [\fIWINDOW_NAME\fR] [\fIPANE_NUMBER\fR] [\fICOMMAND\fR]
Execute a command remotely inside a background pane.
.TP
\fBgenerate-ssh-config\fR
Generate an SSH config snippet for seamless remote workflows.
.TP
\fBhelp\fR
Display help information.
.TP
\fBinstall\fR
Install txm binary and man page.
.TP
\fBlist\fR
List all active sessions and display the number of attached clients.
.TP
\fBnuke\fR
Remove all sessions.
.TP
\fBpane\fR [\fIkill|list\fR]
Manage panes within a window.
.TP
\fBrename-session\fR [\fIOLD_SESSION_NAME\fR] [\fINEW_SESSION_NAME\fR]
Rename a session.
.TP
\fBuninstall\fR
Uninstall txm cleanly from your system.
.TP
\fBupdate\fR
Update txm to the latest version directly from GitHub Releases.
.TP
\fBversion\fR [\fB\-\-check-update\fR]
Show version information and optionally check for updates.
.TP
\fBwindow\fR [\fIkill|list|new|next|prev|rename|split\fR]
Manage windows within a session.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Enable verbose output for debugging.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TXM_DEFAULT_BACKEND
Set the default backend to use (native, tmux, zellij, or screen). Overrides configuration file settings.
.TP
.B TXM_SESSION_PREFIX
Automatically namespaces session names across all commands.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
If set, disables colored output.
.TP
.B TERM
Used to detect terminal capabilities for colored output.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Create a new session:
.B txm create mysession
.TP
List all sessions:
.B txm list
.TP
Set default backend to zellij:
.B txm config set backend zellij
.TP
Show current configuration:
.B txm config show
.TP
Use specific backend via environment:
.B TXM_DEFAULT_BACKEND=tmux txm create mysession
.TP
Create and split a window:
.B txm window new mysession mywindow
.B txm window split mysession mywindow v
.TP
Execute a command in a pane:
.B txm exec mysession mywindow 0 "ls -la"
.TP
Rename a window:
.B txm window rename mysession mywindow newname
.TP
Enable verbose output:
.B txm -v list
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.txm/config
Configuration file (if supported).
.TP
.I ~/.local/bin/txm
Default user installation location.
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/txm
System-wide installation location.
.SH NOTES
\fBtxm\fR automatically detects available backends in the following order: native, tmux, zellij, screen. Feature availability varies by backend:

.B native:
Built-in lightweight backend using libghostty. Provides high-performance accurate VT terminal emulation with a configurable scrollback ring buffer for session persistence and instant restoration.

.B tmux:
Full feature set including pane operations, window management, and advanced session control.

.B zellij:
Modern workspace paradigm with tab-based workflow. Most features supported with workspace/tab terminology.

.B GNU Screen:
Basic session and window operations. Limited feature set compared to tmux and zellij.

Backend selection can be overridden via configuration or environment variables.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Mohamed Elashri.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/MohamedElashri/txm/issues
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBtmux\fR(1), \fBzellij\fR(1), \fBscreen\fR(1)